# CallVars: 

This is a snakemake pipeline for getting a list of somatic and/or germline variants using short paired-end reads data generated by illumina sequencing machines. The pipeline has been tested using 64-bit linux OS.

# Pipleine workflow:
1) Pre-processing using Cutadapt
2) Mapping using BWA
3) Sorting using samtools
4) Removing duplicates using GATK MarkDuplicates
5) Indexing using samtools
6) Base quality score recalibration using GATK BaseRecalibrator and ApplyBQSR
7) Germline variant detection using GATK HaplotypeCaller
8) Somatic variant detection using GATK Mutect2

# Setting up working directory:
All the below listed files and directories need to be present in the working directory before you can run the NGS analysis.

- Paired-end reads (ending in _R1.fastq and _R2.fastq, say A_R1.fastq and A_R2.fastq) in ‘FastQ’ directory
- CallVars.yml
- Snakefile
- 1000G_phase1.indels.hg19.sites.vcf
- 1000G_phase1.indels.hg19.sites.vcf.idx
- dbSNP_20180423.vcf
- dbSNP_20180423.vcf.idx
- GNOMAD_hg19.vcf
- GNOMAD_hg19.vcf.idx
- Mills_and_1000G_gold_standard.indels.hg19.sites.vcf
- Mills_and_1000G_gold_standard.indels.hg19.sites.vcf.idx
- Reference Genome Directory ‘UCSCWholeGenomeFasta’ containing files
  	genome.dict, genome.fa, genome.fa.amb, genome.fa.ann, genome.fa.bwt, genome.fa.fai, genome.fa.pac, genome.fa.sa, GenomeSize.xml

# Steps using linux commad line interface for running NGS analysis using snakemake

1)	Check the working directory and FastQ files: 

Make sure you are in the working directory that contains all the needed files and folders for running snakemake.
Make sure your Fastq files are in ‘FastQ’ directory and they end in ‘_R1.fastq’ and ‘_R2.fastq’, say A_R1.fastq and A_R2.fastq. 

2)	Install miniconda: 

Use below link to install miniconda.

https://conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/install/linux.html

3)	Install snakemake:
	
		conda install -c bioconda -c conda-forge snakemake

4)	Create environment CallVars:
	
		conda env create –n CallVars –f CallVars.yml

5)	Activate CallVars environment:

		conda activate CallVars

6)	Running snakemake: 
		Ensure you run the below command in working directory.

		snakemake CallVars_Output/VCF/{your_sample_name}_germline.vcf CallVars_Output/VCF/{your_sample_name}_somatic.vcf --cores N

For instance, if the names if the FastQ files are A_R1.fastq and A_R2.fastq and number of cores available are 6 then run below command.

		snakemake CallVars_Output/VCF/A_germline.vcf CallVars_Output/VCF/A_somatic.vcf --cores 6

Where CallVars_Output/VCF/A_germline.vcf is the germline variant file, CallVars_Output/VCF/A_somatic.vcf is the somatic variant file and N is number of cores.


